---
title: 'Time in Go'
tags: [Go]
---

## Time in Go

 - [Introduction](#introduction)
 - [Time](#time)
    - [Obtaining time](#obtaining-time)
    - [Location (aka timezone)](#location-aka-timezone)
    - [Wall time and monotonic time](#wall-time-and-monotonic-time)
    - [Time comparison and zero time value](#time-comparison-and-zero-time-value)
    - [Implementation details](#implementation-details)
 - [Duration](#duration)
 - [Summary](#summary)

---

---

### Introduction

The [`time`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0) package offers all the needed for processing of time.
The most important are those two data types: `Time` and `Duration`. The `Time` type represents a time
instant (aka timestamp). To represent time interval might be used the `Duration` type. Both mentioned
types are described in this article.

Other than that, `time` package offers one function and two types for waiting the desired time interval
based on `channel`. For single-shot waiting is [`time.After`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0#After)
function. More complex waiting scenarios of waiting is supported either by 
[`time.Timer`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0#Timer) or by 
[`time.Ticker`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0#Ticker). 


---

### Time

Go keeps a time instant as a struct type `time.Time`. Time is represented with nanosecond precision.

Time can be accessed concurrently for reading purpose, therefore methods for decoding/unmarshalling 
(e.g. from Gob, binary, JSON, or text) are not considered concurrency-safe. Time is almost an immutable
type, the only exception are the following methods of `Time` type (which are not concurrency-safe):
[`GobDecode`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0#Time.GobDecode),
[`UnmarshalBinary`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0#Time.UnmarshalBinary),
[`UnmarshalJSON`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0#Time.UnmarshalJSON),
and [`UnmarshalText`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0#Time.UnmarshalText).


#### Obtaining time

There are several ways of obtaining `Time` value from nowhere. Probably the most often used is
[`time.Now`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0#Now) that returns the current time instant (inclusive
monotonic time) in the local timezone.

For explicit time instant construction from all basic timestamp elements (like year, month, day, etc.)
is available [`time.Date`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0#Date). Never try to pass `nil` instead of 
valid location pointer (the last argument) as it will panic.

For extraction of `Time` out of textual representation might be used either
[`time.Parse`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0#Parse) or
[`time.ParseInLocation`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0#ParseInLocation).
Both functions await two string arguments, layout schema and input text. It is recommended to use
pre-defined layout schema constants like `time.RFC3339` and `time.DateTime` (representing
"2006-01-02T15:04:05Z07:00" and "2006-01-02 15:04:05"). The latter function has one more parameter, 
the default value of Location to be used iff location cannot be parsed.

> There are some differences in behavior of `Parse` and `ParseInLocation`.
> Namely `Parse` seems to always return possible timezone name (for "+01:00" is stored location of "CET"),
> but daylight might be ignored (for "CEST" is stored location of "CET" as well).
> But `ParseInLocation` sometimes returns anonymous timezones (for "+01:00" is stored location of "" but
> still having the right offset) and daylight is not ignored (for "CEST" is stored location of "CEST").

Local `Time` might be also constructed from a duration since 1970-01-01T00:00Z:
 - [`Unix`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0#Unix) (duration of seconds and nanoseconds);
 - [`UnixMicro`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0#UnixMicro) (duration of microseconds);
 - [`UnixMilli`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0#UnixMilli) (duration of milliseconds).


#### Location (aka timezone)

Each time has associated so-called `Location` that maps time instant to the time zone in use at that time
together with the current time offset against UTC. For many locations the time offset varies depending
on whether daylight saving time is in use at the time instant.

The [`time`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0) package offers two `Location` "constants" `Local` and `UTC`.
Location might be also loaded by one of available timezone names (e.g. "CET" or "Europe/Prague") via function
[`time.LoadLocation`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0#LoadLocation).

Value of `Time` might be used to construct another instance of the same instant in another timezone
using method [`time.Time.In`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0#Time.In). E.g. UTC time instant with
timestamp 2025-03-08T13:35Z might be moved to CET timezone with timestamp 2025-03-08T14:35+01.
Mind that both timestamps represent exactly the same time instant, but with two different time zones.

To extract abbreviated timezone name and offset (in seconds) might be used method 
[`time.Time.Zone`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0#Time.Zone). Mind that many known timezone names
might map to the same timezone name returned by `Zone` method.

```go
func TestZone(t *testing.T) {
	instant := time.Date(2025, time.March, 8, 13, 35, 0, 0, time.UTC)
	for _, timezoneName := range []string{"CET", "Europe/Prague", "Europe/Berlin", "Europe/Vienna"} {
		loc, err := time.LoadLocation(timezoneName)
		zone, offset = instant.In(loc).Zone()
		
		required.Nil(t, err)
		assert.Equal(t, "CET", zone)
		assert.Equal(t, 3600, offset)
	}
}
```


#### Wall time and monotonic time

OS provides both "wall clock" and "monotonic clock". The main difference is that wall clock is subject
to changes of clock synchronization while monotonic clock is not. Imagine, that your application is running
just during the instant of transition from summer daylight saving time back to standard time in your current
timezone. At this time, you might face one-hour difference between two consecutive wall clock values taken
in just a second. This discontinuity might happen just for wall time measurement. A similar scenario might 
be when your PC synchronize time via internet using NTP that might cause skip of your operating system's wall 
clock even by several seconds.

There are different use cases for wall time and monotonic time. Wall time is used for presentation of the
current time to the used in a human-readable form, while monotonic time is used for time measurements.

Go does not split this into two separate APIs. The time instant returned by 
[`time.Now`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0#Now) always contains both wall time and monotonic time. 
Some methods will be using wall time for time-telling operations, while another methods will be 
utilizing monotonic time for time-measurement operations.

Values of `Time` created by parsing does not contain a monotonic time.

If you need to get rid of a monotonic time, you shall use either `t.Round(0)` or `t.Trunc(0)`.


#### Time comparison and zero time value

The zero value of time is 0001-01-01T00:00:00.000000000Z. To detect that time has its zero value, one might
use [`time.Time.IsZero`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0#Time.IsZero) predicate method. It might be used to 
check whether a time value was explicitly initialized or not.

Never use `==`, because of monotonic time and location differences might fail time comparison pretty easily.
Rather always use `time.Equal` method that prefers comparison of monotonic time (iff both compared `Time` 
values has monotonic time) over wall time comparison. Anyway, it always ignores a location of time value.

Although time is comparable type, it might not be used as map key without time normalization. As one might expect,
time normalization should consist from two separate steps: location normalization and strip off monotonic time
(`Trunc` or `Round` function and then `UTC` method).


#### Implementation details

`Time` is implemented by a struct that is based on two 64b integers and a pointer to `Location`
(or `nil` for UTC). The following illustration presents `Time` exclusive monotonic time:

```text
|-|---------------------------------|------------------------------|
|0|000000000000000000000000000000000| wall time nanoseconds [30b]  |
|-|---------------------------------|------------------------------|

|------------------------------------------------------------------|
|           wall time in seconds since 0001-01-01  [64b]           |
|------------------------------------------------------------------|

|------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                         location pointer                         |
|------------------------------------------------------------------|
```

Representation of `Time` inclusive monotonic time:

```text
|-|---------------------------------|------------------------------|
|1|   wall time seconds since 1885  | wall time nanoseconds [30b]  |
|-|---------------------------------|------------------------------|

|------------------------------------------------------------------|
|       monotonic time nanoseconds since process start [64b]       |
|------------------------------------------------------------------|

|------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                         location pointer                         |
|------------------------------------------------------------------|
```


---

### Duration

`Duration` represents the elapsed time between two instants as nanosecond count represented as `int64`-based
defined type. The selected representation limits the largest representable duration to approximately 290 years.
One might use pre-defined constants from `time.Nanosecond` to `time.Hour` to define magic constants of `Duration`.

`Duration` might be also obtained by:
 - [`time.Time.Sub`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0#Time.Sub) method as a difference between two `Time` values;
 - [`time.Time.Since`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0#Time.Since) method returning time elapsed since `Time` receiver 
   (a shorthand for `time.Now().Sub(t)`);
 - [`time.Time.Until`](https://pkg.go.dev/time@go1.24.0#Time.Until) method returning duration until `Time` receiver
   (a shorthand for `t.Sub(time.Now())`).

Always use [`time.Duration.Abs`] for absolute value of the `Duration` as it handles edge case of minimum value.


---

### Summary

A small reminder on usage of `Time` (`t0` and `t1`), `Duration` (`d`) and `Location` (`l`):
 - Always use `t0.Equal(t1)` for equality checks (as location and monotonic time affects comparison by `==`).
 - For comparison two time instants on a time axis are prepared methods `t0.Before(t1)` and `t1.After(t0)`.
 - All methods for changing location (namely `t0.UTC()`, `t0.Local()`, `t0.In(time.UTC)`, `t0.In(time.Local)`, 
   and the most general form `t0.In(l)`) keeps the same instant (so they are usable for normalization).
 - To strip of monotonic time use `t0.Round(0)` or `t0.Truncate(0)`.
 - Never use concurrently decoding/unmarshalling methods (namely `t0.GobDecode(data)`, `t0.UnmarshalBinary(data)`, 
   `t0.UnmarshalJSON(data)`, `t0.UnmarshalText(data)`).
 - Always normalize `Time` used as `map` keys using `t0.UTC().Truncate(0)`.
 - To get timezone name and/or offset used by the current location in seconds, one might use `t0.Zone()`.
 - To check if monotonic time is included or not might be used `t0.Truncate(0) == t0`.
 - To get the time interval (as a `Duration`) between two instants use `t0.Sub(t1)`.
 - For simple time shifts might be used `t0.Add(d)` or `t0.Add(10*time.Minute)`.
 - For more complex time shifts might be used `t0.AddDate(yearShift, monthShift, dayShift)`, but be careful
   as adding a month to the last day of October will return 1st December (aka normalized form).
 - To strip of time information use `t0.Date()` (extraction of date).
 - To strip of date information use `t0.Clock()` (extraction of time of the day).
 - To extract year and week of the year use `t0.ISOWeek()`.
 - For extraction of day of the year is prepared `t0.YearDay()`.