## Go v1.24

 - [The useful](#the-useful)
 - [The Perhaps-important](#the-perhaps-important)
 - [The Do-not-care](#the-do-not-care-at-least-now)

---

---

Release of Go v1.24 will bring a lot of features. Let us divide them into three parts 
(as inspired by The Good, the Bad and the Ugly).

Go 1.24 now requires Go 1.22.6 or later for bootstrap.

This time a pretty long list of changes is included. I will pick those that hit my eyes.
The rest automatically falls under _The Do-not-care_ part.

---

### The Useful

Generic type aliases might be defined as simply as `type Set[T comparable] = map[K]struct{}`.
It can be disabled by `GOEXPERIMENT=noaliastypeparams`.

> One might e.g. re-export generic types from internally used packages.

Go module **tool** support including a separate `tool` directive in `go.mod` file. To manage tools one might use:
- `go get -tool github.com/awalterschulze/goderive` to add tool to your current Go module;
- `go tool goderive` to run the tool;
- `go get tool` to update all tools (perhaps flag `-u` is needed, not sure right now...);
- `go install tool` to install tool into GOBIN;
- `go tool` to list all available tools.

> Super-convenient feature for those who needs to use tooling (e.g. for equal method generator or for GraphQL
> schema-based generators, etc.). So one might expect in `go.mod` something like:
> ```go
> tool (
>   golang.org/x/tools/cmd/stringer
>   github.com/awalterschulze/goderive
> )
> ```

Go build cache handles executables built by `go run` and `go tool` commands.

> Good for a performance and your SSD.

JSON output support for easier automation of processes using tools like `go build -json`, `go install -json`, 
and `go test -json`.

> CI/CD pipelines made easier.

Encoding into JSON now supports brand-new `omitzero` tag option using `IsZero() bool` to determine whether
the value is zero (to decide whether it shall be omitted or not). One might use both `omitempty,omitzero`
and both checks will be done. Also, `UnmarshalTypeError.Field` includes embedded structs with detailed error message.

> `omitzero` omits zero value of type `time.Time` (while `omitempty` outputs `"0001-01-01T00:00:00Z"`).
> And extra context of marshaling error might also be considered useful.

New experimental `testing/synctest` for concurrent code testing (might be enabled by `GOEXPERIMENT=synctest`).
- The `synctest.Run` function starts a group of goroutines in an isolated “bubble”.
  Within the bubble, `time` package functions operate on a fake clock.
- The `synctest.Wait` function waits for all goroutines in the current bubble to block.

> Easier testing of not just timeouts.

The `testing` package provides `Context` method (to detect test being finished) and `Chdir` method (to change working
directory for the test) provided for both `T` and `B` types.

> Unit tests might be a bit better...

New standard iterators provided by both `bytes` and `strings` packages:
- `Lines` returns an iterator over the newline-terminated lines in a byte slice.
- `SplitSeq` returns an iterator over all sub-slices of a byte slice split around a separator.
- `SplitAfterSeq` returns an iterator over sub-slices of a byte slice split after each instance of a separator.
- `FieldsSeq` returns an iterator over sub-slices of a byte slice split around runs of whitespace characters,
  as defined by `unicode.IsSpace`.
- `FieldsFuncSeq` returns an iterator over sub-slices of a byte slice split around runs of Unicode code points 
  satisfying a predicate.
But also methods returning iterators for all `go/types` data structures exposing sequences via `Len` and `At` methods.

> Imagine all the happy developers using `strings.Lines` or `bytes.Lines`. Implementation of own iterators is not that
> fun, but using them makes the code nice and lean.

The brand-new `Text` function from `crypto/rand` can be used to generate cryptographically secure random text strings.
Other than that, no more crashing on `Read` function.

> Random string might be of use from day to day.


---


### The Perhaps-important

The `go build` command sets main module's version based on the version control system tag or commit. 
Uncommited changes will include `+dirty` suffix. Use `-buildvcs=false` flag to disable this feature.

> I have never checked details packed to binaries during compilation. One should check it...

New analyzers reports common mistakes in declaration of tests, fuzzers, benchmarks, examples, and
`fmt.Printf(s)` (where `s` is a non-constant format string while no other arguments are passed).

> Easier detection of mistakes is always appreciated.

Builtin `map` implementation switched to the one based on Swiss Tables. It can be disabled by
`GOEXPERIMENT=noswissmap`. Also `sync.Map` is implemented based on Hash Trie. It can be disabled by
`GOEXPERIMENT=nosynchashtriemap`. New runtime internal mutex implementation can be disabled by 
`GOEXPERIMENT=nospinbitmutex`.

> A bunch of runtime optimizations. One might check more details on Swiss Table and Hash Trie data structures
> for perhaps interested details.

The new `os.Root` type (returned by `os.OpenRoot()`) provides the ability to perform filesystem operations within 
a specific directory (outside might be reached only via symlinks).

> It might be good to investigate `os.Root` for some hobby tools.

New interfaces [`TextAppender`](https://tip.golang.org/pkg/encoding#TextAppender) and 
[`BinaryAppender`](https://tip.golang.org/pkg/encoding#BinaryAppender) for `encoding` package
to append the textual or binary representation of an object to a byte slice without allocating 
a new slice each time (in comparison to `TextMarshaler` and `BinaryMarshaler`).
Those interfaces are implemented by many standard types including those from package
`math/big`, `net`, `regexp`, `time`, `crypto`, etc.

> Easy-gained performance boost by reducing need of memory allocations.

Transport and Server now have `HTTP2` fields to enable configuration of HTTP/2 protocol settings.

> One might need to fine-tune HTTP/2 protocol.

The `go:wasmexport` compiler directive is added for Go programs to export functions to the WebAssembly host.

> Possibility for an easy way to start messing around with WebAssembly.

---


### The Do-not-care (at least now)

Cgo supports `#cgo noescape cFunctionName` and `#cgo nocallback cFunctionName` annotations to improve
runtime performance.

> Not directly useful as I do not use Cgo anywhere right now.

Benchmark can use introduced `b.Loop() { ... }`.

> There is already pretty nice and concise `for range b.N { ... }`. Perhaps I did not get two significant advantages:
> - The benchmark function will execute exactly once per -count, so expensive setup and cleanup steps execute only once.
> - Function call parameters and results are kept alive, preventing the compiler from fully optimizing away the loop body.

Improved finalizers.

> Too low-level for me now.

Weak pointers as a brand-new low-level primitive provided by `weak` package.

> Perhaps they might enable some memoization...

New crypto algorithms: 
`crypto/mlkem` (ML-KEM-768 and ML-KEM-1024; a post-quantum key exchange mechanism formerly known as Kyber and specified 
in [FIPS 203](https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.FIPS.203));
`crypto/hkdf` (HMAC-based Extract-and-Expand key derivation function HKDF;
[RFC 5869](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5869.html));
`crypto/pbkdf2` (implements the password-based key derivation function PBKDF2;
[RFC 8018](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8018.html));
`crypto/sha3` (SHA-3 hash function and SHAKE and cSHAKE extendable-output functions; 
[FIPS 202](http://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.FIPS.202)).
But also other topics touched, e.g. new stuff for `crypto/rsa`, implementation of `encoding.BinaryAppender`
interface by almost every crypto type, and revised certificate handling by `crypto/x509`.

> When you need it, it is great to have it available. If not, you simply skip it... 
